Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, we're going to talk all about hearing and balance
and how you can use your ability to hear specific things
and your balance system in order to learn anything faster.
The auditory system, meaning the hearing system,
and your balance system,
which is called the vestibular system,
interact with all the other systems of the brain and body
and used properly can allow you
to learn information more quickly,
remember that information longer and with more ease,
and you can also improve the way you can hear.
You can improve your balance.
We're going to talk about tools for all of that.
This is one area of science where we understand a lot
about the cells and the mechanisms in the ear
and in the brain and so forth,
so we're going to talk about that a little bit,
and then we're going to get directly into protocols,
meaning tools.
We're also going to talk about ways
in which the auditory and balance systems suffer.
We're going to talk about tinnitus,
which is this ringing of the ears that,
unfortunately for people that suffer from it,
they really suffer.
It's very intrusive for them.
We're going to talk about some treatments that can work
in some circumstances
and some of the more recent emerging treatments
that I think many people aren't aware of.
We're also going to talk about this,
what seems like kind of a weird fact,
which is that 70% of people, all people,
make what are called autoacoustic emissions.
Their ears actually make noises.
Chances are your ears are making noises right now,
but you can't perceive them,
and yet those can have an influence on other people
and animals in your environment.
It's a fascinating aspect to your biology.
You're going to learn a lot about how your biology
and brain and ears and the so-called inner ear
that's associated with balance,
you're going to learn a lot about how all those work.
You're going to learn a lot of neuroscience.
I'll even tell you what type of music to listen to,
and if you listen to me,
you can leverage that in order to learn faster.
Before we begin talking about the science
of hearing and balance and tools
that leverage hearing and balance for learning faster,
I want to provide some information
about another way to learn much faster.
There's a paper that was published recently.
This is a paper that was published in Cell Reports,
an excellent journal.
It's a peer-reviewed paper from a really excellent group
looking at skill learning.
Now, previously, I've talked about
how in the attempt to learn skills,
the vital thing to do is to get lots of repetitions.
You've heard of the 10,000 hours thing.
You've heard of lots of different strategies
for learning faster, 80-20 rule and all that.
The bottom line is you need to generate
many, many repetitions of something
that you're trying to learn,
and the errors that you generate
are also very important for learning.
It also turns out that taking rest
within the learning episode is very important.
I want to be really clear what I'm referring to here.
In earlier episodes,
I've discussed how when you're trying to learn something,
it's beneficial, it's been shown in scientific studies,
that if you take a 20-minute shallow nap
or you simply do nothing after a period of learning,
that it enhances the rates of learning
and the depth of learning,
your ability to learn and remember that information.
What I'm about to describe are new data
that say that you actually should be injecting rest
within the learning episode.
I'm not talking about going to sleep while learning.
This is the way that the study was done.
The study involved having people
learn sequences of numbers or keys on a piano.
So let's use the keys on a piano example.
I'm not a musician, but I think I'll get this correct.
They asked people to practice a sequence of keys,
G-D-F-E-G, G-D-F-E-G, G-D-F-E-G,
and they would practice that either continually
for a given amount of time,
or they would just do that for 10 seconds.
They would play G-D-F-E-G, G-D-F-E-G, G-D-F-E-G,
G-D-F-E-G for 10 seconds,
and then they would take a 10-second pause, a rest.
They would just take a space or a period of time
where they do nothing for 10 seconds.
Then they would go back to G-D-F-E-G, G-D-F-E-G.
So the two conditions essentially
were to have people practice continually,
lots of repetitions, or to inject or insert
these periods of 10 seconds idle time
where they're not doing anything,
they're not looking at their phone,
they're not focusing on anything,
they're just letting their mind drift
wherever it wants to go,
and they are not touching the keys on the keyboard.
What they found was that the rates of learning,
the skill acquisition and the retention of the skills
was significantly faster
when they injected these short periods of rest,
these 10-second rest periods.
And the rates of learning were,
when I say significantly faster, were much, much faster.
I'll reveal what that was in just a moment.
But you might ask, why would this work?
Why would it be that injecting these 10-second rest periods
would enhance rates of learning?
What they called them was micro-offline gains
because they're sort of taking their brain offline
from the learning task for a moment.
Well, it turns out the brain isn't going offline at all.
You've probably heard of the hippocampus,
the area of the brain involved in memory,
and the neocortex, the area of the brain
that's involved in processing sensory information.
Well, it turns out that during these brief periods of rest,
these 10-second rest periods,
the hippocampus and the cortex are active in ways
such that you get a 20-times repeat of the GDFEG.
It's a temporal compression, as they say.
So basically, the rehearsal continues while you rest,
but at 20 times the speed.
So if you were normally getting just, let's just say,
five repetitions of GDFEG, GDFEG, GDFEG per 10 seconds,
now you multiply that times 20.
In the rest periods, you've practiced it 100 times.
Your brain has practiced it.
We know this because they were doing brain imaging,
functional imaging of these people with brain scanners
while they were doing this.
This is an absolutely staggering effect.
And it's one that, believe it or not,
has been hypothesized or thought to exist
for a very long time.
This effect is called the spacing effect,
and it was actually first proposed by Ebington in 1885.
And since then, it's been demonstrated
for a huge number of different what they call domains,
in the cognitive domain, so for learning languages,
in the physical domain, so for learning skills
that involve a motor sequence.
It's been demonstrated for a huge number
of different categories of learning.
If you want to learn all about the spacing effect
and the categories of learning that it can impact,
there's a wonderful review article.
I'll provide a link to it.
The title of the review article is
Parallels Between Spacing Effects During Behavioral
and Cellular Learning.
What that review really does is it ties
the behavioral learning and the improvement of skill
to the underlying changes in neurons
that can explain that learning.
I should mention that the paper that I'm referring to,
the more recent paper that injects these 10-second
little micro offline gains rest periods,
is the work of the laboratory of Leonard Cohen,
not the musician Leonard Cohen.
He passed away, he was not a neuroscientist,
a wonderful poet and musician, but not a neuroscientist.
Again, the paper was published in Cell Reports,
and we will provide a link to the full paper as well.
So the takeaway is if you're trying to learn something,
you need to get those reps in,
but one way that you can get 20 times the number of reps in
is by injecting these little 10-second periods
of doing nothing.
Again, during those rest periods,
you really don't want to attend to anything else
as much as possible.
You could close your eyes if you want,
or you can just simply wait and then get right back
into generating repetitions.
I find these papers that Cell Reports and other journals
have been publishing recently to be fascinating
because they're really helping us understand
what are the best protocols for learning anything,
and they really leverage the fact
that the brain is willing to generate repetitions for us,
provided that we give it the rest that it needs.
So inject rest throughout the learning period,
and if you can, based on the scientific data,
you would also want to take a 20-minute nap
or a 20-minute decompressed period
where you're not doing anything after a period of learning.
I think those could both synergize
in order to enhance learning even further,
although that hasn't been looked at yet.
Before we begin talking about hearing and balance,
I just want to mention that this podcast is separate
from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information about science
and science-related tools to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I want to thank the sponsors of today's podcast
and make it clear that we only work with sponsors
whose products we absolutely love
and that we think you will benefit from as well.
Our first sponsor is Roca.
Roca makes sunglasses and eyeglasses
that, in my opinion, are the very highest quality available.
The company was founded by two All-American swimmers
from Stanford, and everything about their eyeglasses
and sunglasses were created with performance in mind.
These eyeglasses and sunglasses have a number of features
that really make them unique.
First of all, they're extremely lightweight.
The optical clarity of the lenses is spectacular.
And for the sunglasses,
they have this really great feature,
which is as you move in and out of shadows
or as across the day, the amount of sunshine might change,
you always experience the world as clear and bright.
And that can only come from really understanding
how the visual system works.
The visual system has all these mechanisms
for adaptation and habituation.
You don't need to know how those things work,
but the folks at Roca clearly do
because you put these glasses on
and you don't even notice that they're on.
They also stay on your face even if you get sweaty.
They were designed to be used while active,
so running and biking, et cetera, or indoors.
One thing that I really like
about Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses
is that the aesthetic is terrific.
Even though they were designed for performance,
unlike a lot of sunglasses out there
that were designed for performance
that look kind of ridiculous, kind of space age,
Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses, you could wear anywhere.
And the aesthetic is really clean
and they have a huge number of different styles
to select from.
If you'd like to try Roca eyeglasses,
you can go to Roca, that's R-O-K-A dot com,
and enter the code Huberman
to save 20% off your first order.
That's Roca, R-O-K-A dot com,
and enter the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's podcast is also brought to us by Inside Tracker.
Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done
for the simple reason that many of the factors
that impact our immediate and long-term health
can only be analyzed from a quality blood test.
And now with the advent of DNA tests,
we can get further insight and information
into how our metabolism is working,
how our brain is functioning, how our endocrine system,
meaning our hormone system is functioning.
One of the issues with a lot of companies and programs
that involve getting blood and DNA tests, however,
is that you get the information back,
you don't know what to do with that information.
With Inside Tracker, they make all of that very easy.
First of all, they can send someone to your home
to take the samples if you like,
or you can go to a local clinic.
You get the information back,
and of course you get all the numbers
and levels of hormone factors, metabolic factors, et cetera.
But the dashboard in Inside Tracker provides directives
so that if you want to bring those numbers up
or bring them down,
or if you want to keep them in the same range,
it points to specific regimens related to nutrition,
exercise, and other lifestyle factors.
So you can really move around those numbers
to best suit your health goals and health status.
If you want to try Inside Tracker,
you can go to insidetracker.com slash Huberman,
and you'll get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans.
Just use the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's podcast is also brought to us by Headspace.
Headspace is a meditation app
that's backed by 25 published studies.
And in addition to those,
there are hundreds of studies showing
that meditation is beneficial for our brain
and for our body.
One of the challenges, however, is maintaining
a meditation practice.
I started meditating a long time ago,
but I found it very hard to keep that practice going.
Then I discovered the Headspace meditation app,
and what I found was that because they have meditations
that are very short, as well as some that are longer
and some that are much longer,
I could maintain my meditation practice.
Sometimes I do a short five-minute meditation.
Sometimes I do 20-minute meditation.
I try and meditate at least 20 minutes per day,
but sometimes, some weeks, I only do it five times a week,
and I'll just meditate for longer.
So with Headspace, you have the full palette
of meditations to select from.
If you want to try Headspace,
you can go to headspace.com slash special offer,
and if you do that, you'll get a free one-month trial,
so no cost whatsoever,
with their full library of meditations.
That's the best offer that they have.
So again, if you want to try Headspace
and you want to get access to all their meditations for free,
go to headspace.com slash special offer.
Can you hear me?
Okay, well, if you can hear me, that's amazing,
because what it means is that my voice
is causing little tiny changes in the airwaves,
wherever you happen to be,
and that your ears and whatever's contained in those ears
and in your brain can take those sound waves
and make sense of them,
and that is an absolutely fantastic
and staggering feat of biology,
and yet we understand a lot about how that process works.
So I'm going to teach it to you now in simple terms
over the next few minutes.
So what we call ears have a technical name.
That technical name is oracles,
but more often they're called pinna.
The pinna is P-I-N-N-A, pinna,
and the pinna of your ears,
this outer part that is made of cartilage and stuff,
is a range such that it can capture sound
in the best way for your head size.
We're going to talk about ear size also,
because it turns out that your ears change size
across the lifespan and that how big your ears are,
or rather how fast your ears are changing size
is a pretty good indication of how fast you're aging.
So we'll get to that in a few minutes,
but I want to talk about these things that we call ears
and some of the stuff contained within them
that allow us to hear.
So the shape of these ears that we have
is such that it amplifies high frequency sounds.
High frequency sounds as the name suggests
is the squeakier stuff, right?
So low frequency sound.
Costello snoring in the background,
that's a low frequency sound or high frequency sound, okay?
So we have low frequency sounds and high frequency sounds
and everything in between.
Now those sound waves get captured by our ears
and those sound waves,
for those of you that don't
maybe fully conceptualize sound waves
are literally just fluctuations or shifts
in the way that air is moving
toward your ear and through space.
In the same way that water can have waves,
the air can have waves, okay?
So it's reverberation of air.
Those come in through your ears
and you have what's called your eardrum.
And on the inside of your eardrum,
there's a little bony thing
that's shaped like a little hammer.
So attached to that eardrum,
which can move back and forth like a drum,
it's like a little membrane,
you've got this hammer attached to it.
And that hammer has three parts.
For those of you that want to know,
those three parts are called malleus, incus, and stapes.
But basically you can just think about it as a hammer.
So you've got this eardrum and then a hammer,
and then that hammer has to hammer on something.
And what it does is it hammers on a little coiled piece
of tissue that we call the cochlea,
sometimes called the cochlea,
depending on where somebody lives in the country.
So typically in the Midwest, on the East Coast,
they call them cochlea.
And on the West Coast, we call them cochlea.
Same thing, okay?
So the snail-shaped structure in your inner ear
is where sound gets converted into electrical signals
that the brain can understand.
But I want to just bring your attention to that little hammer
because that little hammer is really, really cool.
What it means is that sound waves come in through your ears.
That's what's happening right now.
That eardrum that you have, it's like the top of a drum.
It's like a membrane, or it can move back and forth.
It's not super rigid.
And it moves that little hammer,
and then the hammer goes dung, dung, dung, dung, dung,
and hits this coil-shaped thing
that we're calling the cochlea, okay?
Now, the cochlea at one end is more rigid than the other.
So one part can move really easily,
and the other part doesn't move very easily.
And that turns out to be very important
for decoding or separating sounds that are low frequency,
like Costello's snoring,
and sounds that are of high frequency,
like a shriek or a shrill.
And that's because within that little coiled thing
we call the cochlea,
you have all these tiny little,
what are called hair cells.
Now, they look like hairs,
but they're not at all related to the hairs on your head
or elsewhere on your body.
They're just shaped like hairs, so we call them hair cells.
Those hair cells, if they move,
send signals into the brain
that a particular sound is in our environment.
And if those hair cells don't move,
it means that particular sound is not in our environment,
okay?
So just to give you the mental picture of this,
sound waves are coming in
because there's stuff out there making noises like my voice.
It's changing the patterns of air around you
in very, very subtle ways.
That information is getting funneled into your ears
because your pinna's are shaped in a particular way.
The eardrum then moves this little hammer
and the hammer bangs on this little snail-shaped thing.
And because that snail-shaped thing at one end
is very rigid, it doesn't want to move.
And at the other end, it's very flexible.
It can separate out high-frequency and low-frequency sounds.
And the fact that this thing in your inner ear
that we call the cochlea is coiled
is actually really important to understand
because along its length,
it varies in how rigid or flexible it is.
I already mentioned that before.
And at the base, it's very rigid.
And that's where the hair cells, if they move,
will make high-frequency sounds.
And at the top, what's called the apex,
it's very flexible and it's more like a bass drum.
So basically what happens is sound waves come into your ears
and then at one end of this thing that we call the cochlea,
at the top, it's essentially encoding
or only responding to sounds that are like,
doom, doom, doom, doom.
Whereas at the bottom, it responds to high-frequency sounds
like a cymbal, tss, tss, tss, tss, tss, tss.
Okay, and everywhere in between,
we have other frequencies, medium frequencies.
Now, this should stagger your mind.
If it doesn't already, it should.
Because what this means is that
everything that's happening around us,
whether or not it's music or voices or crying or screaming
or screaming of delight from small children
who are excited because they're playing
or because they get cake,
all of that is being broken down into its component parts.
And then your brain is making sense of what it means.
These things that I've been talking about,
like the pinna of your ears and this little hammer
and the cochlea, that's all purely mechanical.
It has no mind of its own.
It's just breaking things down into high frequencies,
medium frequencies, and low frequencies.
And if you don't understand sound frequency,
it's really simple to understand.
Just imagine ripples on a pond.
And if those ripples are very close together,
that's high frequency.
They occur at high frequency.
If those ripples are further apart, it's low frequency.
And obviously, medium frequency is in between.
So just like you can have waves in water,
you can have waves in air.
So that's really how it works.
Now, we are all familiar with light
and how if you take a prism and put it in front of light,
it will split that light into its different wavelengths,
its different colors, red, green, blue, et cetera, right?
So like the Pink Floyd, Dark Side of the Moon album,
I think has a prism and it's converting white light
into all the colors,
all the wavelengths that are contained in white light.
Your cochlea essentially acts as a prism.
It takes all the sound in your environment
and it splits up those sounds into different frequencies.
So you can think of the cochlea of your ear
sort of like a prism.
And then the brain takes that information
and puts it back together and makes sense of it.
So those hair cells in each of your two cochlea,
because you have two ears, you also have two cochlea,
send little wires, what we call axons,
that convey their patterns of activity into the brain.
And there are a number of different stations
within the brain that information arrives at
before it gets up to the parts of your brain
where you are consciously aware.
And because some of you have asked for more names
in nomenclature, I'll give that to you.
If you don't want a lot of detailed names,
you can just ignore what I'm about to say.
But basically the cochlea send information
to what's called the spiral ganglion.
The spiral ganglion, a ganglion, by the way,
if you're going to learn any neuroscience,
just know that anytime you hear ganglion,
a ganglion is just a clump.
So it means a bunch of neurons.
So a clump of cells.
So the spiral ganglion is a bunch of neurons
that the information then goes off to
what are called the cochlear nuclei in the brainstem.
Brainstem is kind of down near your neck.
Then up to a structure that has a really cool name
called the superior olive
because you have one on each side of your brain.
And if I were to bring you to my lab
and show you the superior olives in your brain
or anyone else's brain, they look like little olives.
They even have a little divot in them
that to me looks like a pimento,
but they just call them the superior olive.
And then the neurons in the superior olive,
then they send information up to what's called
the inferior colliculus, only called inferior
because it sits below a structure
called the superior colliculus.
And then the information goes up
to what's called the medial geniculate nucleus
and then up to your neocortex
where you make sense of it all.
Now you don't have to remember all that,
but you should know that there are a lot of stations
in which auditory information is processed
before it gets up to our conscious detection.
And there is a good reason for that,
which is that more important than knowing what you're hearing
you need to know where it's coming from.
It's vital to our survival that if something,
for instance, is falling toward us,
that we know if it's coming to our right side,
if it's going to hit us from behind,
we have to know, for instance,
if a car is coming at us from our left or from our right,
and our visual system can help with that,
but our auditory and our visual system collaborate
to help us find and locate the position of things in space.
That should come as no surprise.
If you hear somebody talking off to your right,
you tend to turn to your right, not to your left.
If you see somebody's mouth moving in front of you,
you tend to assume that the sound
is going to come from right in front of you.
Disruptions in this auditory hearing and visual matching
are actually the basis of what's called
the ventriloquism effect,
which we'll talk about in a few minutes in more depth,
but the ventriloquism effect can basically be described
in simple terms as when you essentially think
that a sound is coming from a location
that it's not actually coming from.
We'll talk about that in a moment,
but what I'd like you to realize
is that one of these stations deep in your brainstem
is responsible for helping you identify
where sounds are coming from
through a process that's called interaural time differences.
And that sounds fancy,
but really the way you know where things are coming from,
what direction a car or a bus or a person is coming from
is because the sound lands in one ear before the other.
And you have stations in your brain,
meaning you have neurons in your brain
that calculate the difference in time of arrival
for those sound waves in your right versus your left ear.
And if they arrive at the same time,
you assume that thing is making noise right in front of you.
If it's off to your right,
you assume it's over on your right.
And if the sound arrives first to your left ear,
you assume quite correctly
that the thing is coming toward your left ear.
So it's a very simple and kind of mechanical system
at the level of sound localization.
But what about up and down?
If you think about it,
a sound coming from above is going to land on your right ear
and your left ear at the same time.
A sound from below is going to land on your right ear
So the way that we know where things are
in terms of what's called elevation,
where they are in the up and down plane
is by the frequencies.
The shape of your ears actually modifies the sound
depending on whether or not it's coming straight at you
from the floor or from high above.
And so already at the level of your ears,
you are taking information about the outside world
and determining where that information is coming from.
Now, this all happens very, very fast and subconscious,
but now you know why.
If people really want to hear something,
they make a cup around their ear.
They essentially make their ear
into more of a fennec fox type ear.
If you've ever seen those cute little fennec fox things,
they have these big spiky ears.
They kind of look like a French bulldog,
although they're kind of the fox version of the French bulldog
with these big, tall ears,
and they have excellent sound localization.
And so when people lean in with their hand like this,
if you're listening to this,
I'm just cupping my hand at my ear,
I'm giving myself a bigger pinna.
Okay, and if I do it on the left side, I can do this side.
And if I really want to hear something,
I do it on both sides, okay?
So this isn't just gesturing.
This actually serves a mechanical role.
And actually, if you want to hear where things are coming from
with a much greater degree of accuracy,
this can actually help
because you're capturing sound waves
and funneling them better.
It's really remarkable, this whole system.
So you've got these two ears,
and because of the differences in the timing
of when things arrive in those two ears,
as well as these differences in the frequencies
that certain things sound, or I should say,
the differences in the frequencies
that arrive at your ears,
depending on whether or not the thing is above you
or right in front of you or below you,
you're able to make out
where things are in space pretty well.
So now you're probably starting to realize
that these two things on the side of our head
that we call ears are there for a lot more
than hanging earrings on or for other aesthetic purposes
or for putting sunglasses on top of.
They are very powerful devices
for allowing us to capture sound waves from our environment.
Now I have a question for you,
which is, can you move your ears?
Turns out that unlike other animals,
humans are not terrifically good at moving their ears.
Other animals can move their ears even independently.
So Costello is pretty good at raising his ears,
the two of them together.
He can't really move his ears separately.
Some dogs can do that really well.
In fact, sighthounds and some scent hounds
do that exquisitely well.
Some animals like deer and other animals
that really have very acute hearing
will put one ear down to a very particular angle
and will tilt the other one
and they will actually capture information
about two distant sound-making organisms.
Those could be hunters coming after them
or other animals coming after them.
They are very good at doing this.
We're not so good at it,
but about 60% of people it's thought
can move their ears consciously
without having to touch their ears.
So can you do that?
Maybe you should try it.
Ask someone to look at you
and see whether or not you can do it.
The typical distances that people can move it
is usually no more than two or three millimeters.
It's subtle, but can you flap your pinna
with just using mental control?
If you can, or if you can't,
try looking all the way to your right
or all the way to your left.
Obviously, if you're driving a car
or doing something or exercising,
don't put yourself in danger right now,
but if you move your eyes all the way to your left,
which I'm doing now, or all the way to my right,
you might feel a little bit of a contraction of the muscles.
It's that control ear movement, all right?
Now I want to ask you this.
Can you raise one eyebrow?
I'm not very good at it.
I can do a little bit,
but it's mostly by like cramping down my face on one side
and I certainly can't raise my right eyebrow.
I can only do my left eyebrow.
I'm trying to talk while I'm doing this,
so this is why it looks strange.
People who can raise one eyebrow very easily
almost always can move their ears
without having to touch them.
It's controlled by the same motor pathway.
And there does seem to be a small
but statistically significant sex difference
in the ability to move one's ears.
Typically, men can do this more than women can,
although plenty of women can move their ears as well.
Now, if you think that is all a little strange or off topic,
it's not because what we're really talking about here
is a system of the brain,
but also of the body of the musculature
for localizing things in space.
And so you might find it interesting to note
that one of the things that we share very closely
with other primates, with non-human primates,
like macaque monkeys and chimpanzees,
if you look at their ears, their ears are remarkably similar
to our ears, or rather,
our ears are remarkably similar to their ears.
The eyes of certain monkeys like macaque monkeys
are remarkably similar to human eyes.
This is one of the reasons why
if you look at a baby macaque monkey,
it has this unbelievably human element to it.
But the ears of these primates is very similar to our ears,
our ears similar to their ears.
If you're interested in ear movements
and what they could mean,
and some of the things that ear movements correlate with
in other aspects of our biology,
there's a nice paper, actually, a scientific paper.
The author's last name is Code, C-O-D-E.
It was published in 1995.
I'll give a reference to that.
It's a review article that discusses
some of the sex differences in ear movement control,
as well as the relationship between ear movements
and eye movements.
And it's a pretty accessible paper.
It's one that I think any of you
who are interested in this topic could parse fairly easily.
And there's some very interesting underlying biology
and some theories as to why humans would have
this so-called vestigial or ancient carryover of a system
for moving our ears.
Now, if ear movement seems strange,
next I want to talk about a different feature
of your hearing and ears
that's even stranger,
but that has some really interesting implications
for your biology.
And I'm guessing that you've not heard of this.
What I'm about to describe are called
autoacoustic emissions.
And autoacoustic emissions, as the name suggests,
are sounds that your ears make.
Believe it or not, 70% of people
make noises with their ears,
but they don't actually detect them.
Like I said, you've never heard of this.
Okay, that's not what I mean.
But what I do mean is that 70% of people's ears
are making noise that's cast out of the ear.
And these autoacoustic emissions
actually can be detected by microphones.
Sometimes they can be detected by other people in the room
if they have very good hearing.
Now, it turns out that women,
or I should be technical here,
females who report themselves as heterosexual
have a higher frequency, not frequency of sound,
but a higher frequency of autoacoustic emissions
than do men who report themselves as heterosexual.
Women who report themselves as homosexual or bisexual
make fewer autoacoustic emissions than heterosexual women.
These are data that come from Dennis McFadden's lab
at the University of Texas, Austin.
He actually discovered these
what are called sexual dimorphisms
and differences based on sexual orientation
without looking for them.
He was studying hearing.
He's a auditory scientist.
And people were coming into his laboratory
and they were detecting these autoacoustic emissions
and they started to notice the group differences
in autoacoustic emissions.
So they started asking people about their sex
and about their sexual orientation.
And these differences fell out of the data, as we say.
And it's interesting because autoacoustic emissions
are not something that we associate with sex
or sexual dimorphism,
but what these data really underscore is, first of all,
a lot of us are making noises with our ears,
some of us more than others,
and that exposure to certain combinations
of hormones during development
are very likely shaping the way that our hearing apparati,
meaning the cochlea and the pinna and all sorts of things,
how those develop and how those function
throughout the lifespan.
We did do an episode on hormones and sexual development,
which gets much deeper into the other effects
that hormones have on the developing brain and body.
If you want to check out that episode,
we will put a link to it in the captions.
So now I want to shift to talking about
ways to leverage your hearing system, your auditory system,
so that you can learn anything,
not just auditory information,
but anything faster.
I get a lot of questions about so-called binaural beats.
Binaural beats, as their name suggests,
involve playing one frequency of sound to one ear
and a different frequency of sound to the other ear.
So it might be doon, doon, doon, doon
to your right ear,
and it might be doon, doon, doon, doon, doon, doon,
to the left ear.
And the idea is that the brain will take
those two frequencies of sound
and because the pathways that bring information
from the ears into the brain eventually cross over,
they actually share that information
with both sides of the brain,
that the brain will average that information
and come up with a sort of intermediate frequency.
And the rationale is that those intermediate frequencies
place the brain into a state that is better for learning.
And when I say better for learning,
I want to be precise about what I mean.
That could mean more focus for encoding
or bringing the information in.
As you may have heard me say before,
we have to be alert and focused in order to learn.
There is no passive learning
unless we're little tiny infants.
So can binaural beats make us more focused?
Can binaural beats allow us to relax more if we're anxious?
I know some people, they go to the dentist
and the dentist offers binaural beats
as they drill into your teeth and give root canals
and things of that sort,
probably causing some anxiety
just describing those things right now.
But those are available in many dental practices.
Their binaural beats have been thought
to increase creativity,
or at least have been proposed to increase creativity.
So what are the scientific data say about binaural beats?
There are a number of different apps out there
that offer binaural beats.
There are a number of different programs.
I think you can also even just find these
on YouTube and on the internet,
but typically it's an app and you'll program in
a particular outcome that you want,
more focused, more creative, fall asleep,
less anxious, et cetera.
So what are the scientific data say?
So believe it or not, the science on binaural beats
is actually quite extensive and very precise.
So sound waves are measured typically
in hertz or kilohertz.
I know many of you aren't familiar
with thinking about things in hertz or kilohertz,
but again, just remember those waves on a pond,
those ripples on a pond,
if they're close together, then they are of high frequency.
And if they're far apart, then they are low frequency.
So when you hear more hertz,
what you're essentially hearing is higher frequency, right?
And so if it's many more kilohertz,
then it's much higher frequency
than if it's fewer hertz or kilohertz.
And so you may have heard of these things
as delta waves or theta waves or alpha waves
or beta waves, et cetera.
Delta waves would be big, slow waves, so low frequency.
And indeed, there is quality evidence
from peer-reviewed studies that are not sponsored
by companies that make binaural beat apps
that tell us that delta waves like one to four hertz,
so very low frequency sounds, think Costello's snoring,
can help in the transition to sleep and for staying asleep.
And that theta rhythms,
which are more like four to eight hertz,
can bring the brain into a state of subtle sleep
or meditation, so deeply relaxed, but not fully asleep.
And then you can sort of ascend the staircase of findings
here, so to speak, and you'll find evidence
that alpha waves, eight to 13 hertz,
can increase alertness to a moderate level.
That's a great state for the brain to be in
for recall of existing information, okay?
And that beta waves, 15 to 20 hertz,
are great for bringing the brain into focus states
for sustained thought or for incorporating new information,
and especially gamma waves, the highest frequency,
the most frequent ripples of sound, so to speak,
32 to 100 hertz for learning and problem solving.
Now, all of this matches, or I should say maps
onto what I've said before about learning really nicely,
which is that you need to be in a highly alert state
in order to bring new information in
in order to access a state of mind
in which you can tell your brain,
or the brain is telling itself, okay, I need to learn this.
This is why stress and unfortunate circumstances
are so memorable is because our brain gets
into a really high alert system.
Here, we're talking about the use of binaural beats
in order to increase our level of alertness
or our level of calmness.
Now, that's important to underscore
because it's not that there's something
fundamentally important about the binaural beats.
They are yet another way of bringing the brain
into states of deep relaxation through low-frequency sound
or highly alert states for focused learning
with more high-frequency sound.
So they are effective,
and I'll review a little bit of the data in detail.
They're effective,
but it's not that they're uniquely special for learning.
It's just that they can help some people
bring their brain into the state
that allows them to learn better.
So there are a lot of studies that allowed us to arrive,
or I should say allowed the field to arrive
on these parameters of slow, low-frequency waves
are going to bring you into relaxed states,
high-frequency waves into more alert states.
There's very good evidence for anxiety reduction
from the use of binaural beats.
And what's interesting is the anxiety reduction
seems to be most effective when the binaural beats
are bringing the brain into delta,
so those slow, big waves like sleep, theta, and alpha states.
And I'll link to a couple of these studies,
although I will probably link more to the list
that really segregates them out one by one
so you can see them all next to one another.
There's good evidence that binaural beats
can be used to treat pain, chronic pain.
There's three studies in peer-reviewed journals,
which I took a look at, and they seem to be of good quality,
not sponsored research, as we say,
not paid for by any specific company.
Binaural beats have been shown
to modestly improve cognition, attention,
working memory, and even creativity.
But the real boost from binaural beats
appears to be for anxiety reduction and pain reduction.
Some people might find these beneficial
for these oral surgeries, right?
Believe it or not, there are people who would rather
have the entire root canal or cavity drilled
without Novocain, and that's because they sometimes
have a syringe phobia or something of that sort,
or they just don't like being numb from the Novocain,
or maybe there's an underlying medical reason.
But I think most people don't enjoy
getting their teeth drilled,
even if they have Novocain in there or a root canal.
And so it seems that binaural beats
can be effective in that environment,
and you don't have to go into that sort of
extreme environment to benefit from binaural beats.
Binaural beats are either
relatively inexpensive thing to access.
Most of the apps are pretty inexpensive.
I don't have a favorite binaural beats app
to recommend to you.
I confess I did use binaural beats a few years ago.
I kind of shifted over to other what I call
NSDR, non-sleep deep-rest protocols, in favor of those.
But many people like binaural beats
and say that they benefit from them,
especially while studying or learning.
I think part of the reason for that
relates to the ability to channel our focus
when we have some background noise.
And this is something I also get asked about a lot.
Is it better to listen to music
and have background noise when studying,
or is it better to have complete silence?
Well, there's actually a quite good literature on this
as well, but not so much as it relates to binaural beats,
but rather whether or not people are listening to music,
so-called white noise, brown noise,
believe it or not, there's white noise
and there's brown noise, there's even pink noise,
and how that impacts brain states
that allow us to learn information better or not.
So now I'd like to talk about white noise.
And I want to be very clear that white noise has been shown
to really enhance brain states for learning
in certain individuals, in particular in adults.
But white noise actually can have a detrimental effect
on auditory learning and maybe even the development
of the auditory system in very young children,
in particular in infants.
So first I'd like to talk about the beneficial effects
of white noise on learning.
There are some really excellent studies on this.
The first one that I'd like to just highlight
is one that's entitled Low-Intensity White Noise
Improves Performance in Auditory Working Memory Task,
an FMRI study.
This is a study that explored whether or not learning
could be enhanced by playing white noise in the background.
But the strength of the study is that they looked
at some of the underlying neural circuitry
and the activation of the neural circuitry in these people
as they did the learning task.
And what it essentially illustrates is that white noise,
provided that white noise is of low enough intensity,
meaning not super loud, right?
Not imperceptible, so not so quiet that you can't hear it,
but not super loud either.
It actually could enhance learning to a significant degree.
And this has been shown now for a huge number
of different types of learning.
There's a terrific article as well
as in a somewhat obscure journal, at least obscure to me,
which is the effects of noise exposure
on cognitive performance and brain activity patterns.
That's a study involving 54 subjects.
They basically were evaluated for mental workload
and attention under different levels of noise exposure,
background noise, and different essentially loudness
of noise.
And the reason I like this study is that they looked
at different levels of noise and types of noise,
and they varied a number of different things
as opposed to just doing a kind of two-condition,
either white noise or no white noise type thing.
And what they found, again, is that provided
the white noise is not extremely loud,
it could really enhance brain function
for sake of learning any number
of different kinds of information.
Now, that's all great, but it really doesn't get
to the kind of deeper guts of mechanism.
And as a neuroscientist, what I really want to see
is not just that something has an effect.
That's always nice.
It's always nice to see in a nice peer-reviewed study
without any kind of commercial biases
that there's an effect.
Okay, binaural beats can enhance learning,
or listening to white noise not too loud
can enhance learning.
But you really want to understand mechanism
because once you understand mechanism,
not only does it start to make sense,
but you can also imagine ways
in which you could develop better tools and protocols.
So I was very relieved to find,
or I should say excited to find this study
published in the Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience.
This is a 2014 paper.
White noise improves learning by modulating activity
in dopaminergic midbrain regions
and the right superior temporal sulcus, okay?
Now, I don't expect you to know
what the right superior temporal sulcus is.
I don't expect you to know
what the dopamine midbrain region is,
but if you're like me,
you probably took highlighted notice
of the word dopaminergic.
Dopamine is a neuromodulator,
meaning it's a chemical that's released in our brain
and body, but mostly in our brain,
that modulates, meaning controls the likelihood
that certain brain areas will be active
and other brain areas won't be active.
And dopamine is associated with motivation.
Dopamine is associated with craving.
Motivation is associated with all sorts of different things,
including movement.
But what this study so nicely shows
is that white noise can really enhance
the activity of neurons
in what's called the substantia nigra VTA.
The substantia nigra VTA is a very rich source of dopamine,
and that's because it's very chock-a-block
full of dopamine neurons.
It's an area of the brain
that is perhaps the richest source of dopamine neurons.
And you actually can see this brain region
under the microscope.
If you take a slice of brain or you look at a brain
without even staining it for any proteins
or dopamine or anything,
it's two very dark regions
at the kind of bottom of the brain.
And the reason it's called substantia nigra,
nigra meaning dark,
is because the dopamine neurons actually make something
and that makes those neurons dark.
And so you've got these two regions down there
that contain dopamine and can release dopamine
and essentially activate other brain regions
and activate our sense of motivation
and activate our sense of desire
to continue focusing and learning.
But you can't just snap your fingers
and make them release dopamine.
You actually have to trigger dopamine release from them.
Now, that trigger can be caused
by being very excited about something
or the fact that that thing gave you
a lot of pleasure in the past
or you're highly motivated by fear or desire.
But what's so interesting to me is that it appears
that white noise itself can raise
the what we call the basal,
the baseline levels of dopamine
that are being released from this area,
the substantia nigra.
So now we're starting to get a more full picture
of how particular sounds in our environment
can increase learning.
And that's in part, I believe,
through the release of dopamine from substantia nigra.
So I'm not trying to shift you away from binaural beats
if that's your thing,
but it does appear that turning on white noise
at a low level, not too loud,
you may say, well, how loud?
And I'll tell you in a moment,
but not too loud can allow you to learn better
because of the ways that it's modulating
your brain chemistry.
So how loud or how soft should that white noise be
while you learn?
Well, in these studies, it seemed that white noise
that could be heard by the person,
so it wasn't imperceptible to them,
so it was loud enough that they could hear,
but not so loud that they felt it was intrusive
or irritating to them.
So that's going to differ from person to person
because people have different levels of auditory sensitivity.
It's going to depend on age,
going to depend on a number of different factors.
So I can't tell you turn to level two
on your volume controller.
That's just not going to work.
Also, I don't know how far you are
from a given speaker in the room,
or if you've got earphones in your head,
or you've got speakers in the room,
or if it's coming out of your computer.
I don't know those things.
So what you're going to have to do is adjust that white noise
to a place where it's not interfering
with your ability to focus,
but rather it's enhancing your ability to focus.
I think a good rule of thumb is going to be
to put it probably on the lower third
of any kind of volume dial,
as opposed to in the upper third
where it would really be blasting.
And really blasting any noise, frankly, is not good,
but that's especially not good,
meaning it's especially bad, if you have headphones in.
I do want to mention something about headphones
before I talk about white noise in the developmental context
and why it can be dangerous there.
When you put headphones in your ears,
it has this incredible effect of making the sounds
like they come from inside your head,
not from out in the room.
And now that might seem like kind of a duh,
but that's actually really amazing, right?
Your brain assumes that the sounds are coming
from inside your head,
as opposed from the environment that you're in
the moment you put headphones in.
So if you're listening to an audio book,
or maybe you're listening to this podcast with headphones,
that's very different than when you're listening
to something out in the room and there are other sounds,
other sound waves,
especially if you use these noise cancellation headphones.
So if you're going to use white noise
to enhance studying or learning of any kind,
or this also could be for skill learning,
motor skill learning while you're exercising,
my suggestion would be that if you're using headphones
to keep it quite low, right?
This is an effect on the midbrain dopamine neurons.
That's a background effect of raising the baseline
of dopamine release.
The way that dopamine neurons fires, they're always firing.
Yours are firing right now, so are mine.
When something exciting happens, they fire a lot.
And when something disappointing happens,
that firing, the release of dopamine
goes down below baseline.
What you're talking about here is raising
your overall levels of attention and motivation,
which translate to better learning,
by just tickling those neurons a little bit,
raising the baseline firing, okay?
So you're not turning up the white noise
to the point where you're feeling amazing.
This isn't like turning on your favorite song.
This is actually the opposite.
This is about getting that baseline up just a bit, okay?
So I recommend turning the volume up just a bit
so that you can focus entirely on the tasks
that you're trying to do.
And of course, you've turned on white noise,
so your attention might drift to that for a moment.
Is it too loud? Is it too soft?
If you can disappear into the work, so to speak,
if your attention can disappear into the work,
then that's probably sufficiently quiet.
And for those of you that say,
well, I like really loud music,
and if I just blast the music,
then I forget about the music.
I don't suggest blasting music.
And this is coming from somebody
who really likes loud music.
I grew up with kind of a loud, fast rules mentality.
And if you don't know what loud, fast rules means,
then I can't help you.
But there's a time and a place, perhaps,
to listen to music loud.
But especially with headphones,
you can trigger, excuse me, hearing loss quite rapidly.
And unfortunately, because these hair cells
that we talked about earlier,
our central nervous system neurons,
they do not regenerate.
They do not come back.
Now, along the lines of hearing loss,
I should just say that the best way
to blow out your hearing for good, to eliminate your hearing,
is to have very loud sounds
superimposed on a loud environment, okay?
So loud environments can cause hearing loss over time.
So if you work at a construction site clanging really loud,
or if you work the soundboard in a club or something,
you are headed towards hearing loss
unless you protect your hearing
with earplugs and headphones.
Nowadays, some of the earplugs are very low profile,
meaning you can't see them.
So that's kind of nice so you're not like the,
like when I was younger,
you didn't want to be the dork
to go to the concert with the earplugs,
but turns out those dorks were smarter than everybody else
because they're not the ones who are craning their neck
to try and hear trivial things
at the age of 30 or so
because they blew out their hearing.
So if you are working in a loud environment
or you expose yourselves to a loud environment,
you really want to avoid big inflections
and sound above that.
So loud environment plus fireworks,
loud environment plus gunshot,
loud environments plus very high frequency, intense sound.
That's what we call the two-hip model.
When you, this is also true for concussion
that you can take a kind of a stimulus
that normally would be below the threshold of injury.
You add another stimulus at the same time
that would be below the threshold of injury
and then suddenly you killed the neurons.
So I don't want to make people paranoid,
but you do want to protect your hearing.
It's no fun to lose your hearing.
If you're going to use headphones
and you feel like you want to crank it up all the way,
just remember that the more that you can get
out of a lower volume,
meaning the longer that you can go listening to things
at lower volume,
the longer you'll be able to hear that music or that thing.
So again, I'm not the hearing cop.
That's not my job,
but as somebody who's lost some of his high-frequency
hearing, I can tell you it's not a pleasure.
The old argument that it helps you not have to hear
or listen to people that you don't want to listen to
that doesn't really work.
They just send you text messages instead.
So what about white noise and hearing loss in development?
You know, a lot of people with children
have these kind of noise machines,
like sound waves and things like that
that help the kids sleep.
And look, I think kids getting good sleep
and parents getting good sleep is vital to physical
and mental health and family health.
So I certainly sympathize with those needs.
However, there are data that indicate that white noise
during development can be detrimental
to the auditory system.
I don't want to frighten any parents.
If you played white noise to your kids,
this doesn't mean that their auditory system
or their speech patterns are going to be disrupted
or that their interpretation of speech
is going to be disrupted forever.
But there are data published in the journal Science,
and Science being one of the three apex journals,
Science, Nature, Cell, the most stringent journals,
data published in the journal Science some years ago,
actually by a scientist who I know quite well.
His name is Edward Chang.
He's a medical doctor now.
He's a neurosurgeon.
He's actually the chair of neurosurgery at UCSF.
And he runs a laboratory where they study auditory learning,
neuroplasticity, et cetera.
He and his mentor at the time, Mike Merzenich,
published a paper showing that if young animals,
and this wasn't animal models,
were exposed to white noise, so shh,
the very type of noise that I'm saying as a older person,
and when I say older,
I mean somebody who's in their late teens,
early 20s and older,
could benefit from listening to that at a low level
in the background for sake of learning.
Well, they exposed very young animals to this white noise.
It actually disrupted the maps
of the auditory world within the brain.
And we haven't talked about these maps yet,
but I want to take a moment and talk about them
and explain this effect and what it might mean for you
if you have kids or if you were exposed
to a lot of white noise early on.
So auditory information goes up into our cortex,
into essentially the outside portion of our brain
that's responsible for all of our higher level cognition,
our planning, our decision-making, et cetera, creativity.
And up there, we have what are called tonotopic maps.
What's a tonotopic map?
Well, remember the cochlea, how it's coiled,
and at one end, it responds to high frequencies,
and the other end, it responds to low frequencies?
Sort of like a piano.
The keys sound different as you extend down
and up the piano keys,
and it's organized in a very systematic way, right?
It's not all intermixed high frequencies and low frequencies.
It's organized in a very systematic way
from one end to the other.
Your visual system is in what's called a retinotopic map.
So neighboring points in space off to my right,
like my two fingers off to my right,
are mapped to neighboring points in space in my brain.
And the space right in front of me
is mapped to a different location in my brain,
but it's systematic.
It's regular.
It's not random.
It's not salt and pepper.
It goes from high to low, or from right to center to left.
In the auditory system,
we have what are called tonotopic maps,
where frequency, high frequency to low frequency,
and everything in between is organized
in a very systematic way.
Now, our experience of life from the time we're a baby
until the time that we die is not systematic.
We don't hear low frequencies at one part of the room
or at one part of the day,
and high frequencies at another part of the room
and another part of the day.
They're all intermixed.
But if you remember, the cochlea separates them out
just like a prism of light separates out
the different wavelengths of light.
The cochlea separates out the different frequencies.
And the developing brain
takes those separated out frequencies
and learns this relationship between itself,
meaning the child, and the outside world.
White noise essentially contains no tonotopic information.
The frequencies are all intermixed.
It's just noise.
Whereas when I speak, my voice has,
now I'm getting technical,
but it has what's called a certain envelope,
meaning it has some low frequencies
and some slightly high frequencies.
I can make my voice higher,
although I'm not very good at that.
My voice starts to crack and I can make my voice lower,
although not as low as Costello's snore.
So it has an envelope, it has a container.
White noise has no container.
It's like all the colors of the rainbow spread out together,
which is actually what you get when you get white light.
White noise is analogous to white light.
So one of the reasons why hearing a lot of white noise
during development for long periods of time
can be detrimental to the development of the auditory system
is that these tonotopic maps don't form normally.
At least they don't in experimental animals.
Now, the reason I'm raising this is that many people I know,
in particular friends who have small children,
they say, I want to use a white noise machine while I sleep,
but is it okay for my baby to use a white noise machine?
And I consulted with various people, scientists about this,
and they said, well, you know,
the baby is also hearing the parents' voices
and is hearing music and is hearing the dog bark,
so it's not the only thing they're hearing.
However, every single person that I consulted with said,
but you know, there's neuroplasticity during sleep,
that's when the kid is sleeping,
and I don't know that you'd want to expose a child
to white noise the entire night,
because it might degrade that tonotopic map.
It might not destroy it, it might not eliminate it,
but it could make it a little less clear,
like sort of taking the keys on the piano
and taping a few of them together, right?
So you've still got the highs and lows
in the appropriate order and everything in between,
but when you tape the keys together,
you don't get the same fidelity,
you don't get the same precision
of the noise that comes out of that piano.
So again, I don't want to scare anybody,
but I would say if you are in a position
to make the choice of either using white noise
or something similar,
pink noise is just a kind of variation,
it's got a little bit more of a certain frequency,
just like pink light has a little bit more
of a certain wavelength than white light, kind of,
if you are in a position to make choices
about things to put in a young,
especially very young child's sleeping environment,
white noise might be something to consider avoiding.
Again, I'm not telling you what to do,
but it's something to perhaps consider avoiding.
I don't think most pediatricians
are going to be aware of these data,
but if you talk to any auditory physiologist
or an audiologist or somebody
who studies auditory development,
I'm fairly certain that they would have opinions about that.
Now, whether or not their opinions agree with mine
and these folks that I consulted with
or not is a separate matter,
I don't know because I don't know them,
but it's something that I felt was important enough
to cue you to, especially since I've highlighted,
excuse me, the opposite effect is true in adulthood.
Once your auditory system has formed,
once it's established these tonotopic maps,
then the presence of background white noise
should not be a problem at all.
In fact, it shouldn't be a problem at all
because you're also not attending to it.
The idea is that it's playing at a low enough volume
that you kind of forget it in the background
and that it's supporting learning
by bringing your brain into a heightened state of alertness
and especially this heightened state of dopamine,
dopaminergic activation of the brain,
which will make it easier to learn faster
and easier to learn the information.
So now I want to talk about auditory learning
and actually how you can get better
at learning information that you hear,
not just information that you see on a page
or motor skill learning.
There are a lot of reasons to want to do this.
A lot of classroom teaching,
whether or not it's by Zoom or in person,
is auditory in nature.
Not everything is necessarily written down for us.
It's also good to get better at listening, or so I'm told.
So there's a phenomenon called the cocktail party effect.
Now, even if you've never been to a cocktail party,
you've experienced and participated
in what's called the cocktail party effect.
The cocktail party effect is where you are in an environment
that's rich with sound,
many sound waves coming from many different sources,
many different things.
So in a city, in a classroom,
in a car that contains people having various conversations,
you somehow need to be able to attend
to specific components of those sound waves,
meaning you need to hear certain people and not others.
The reason it's called the cocktail party effect
is that you, and meaning your brain,
are exquisitely good at creating a cone
of auditory attention, a narrow band of attention
with which you can extract the information you care about
and wipe away or erase all the rest.
Now, this takes work.
It takes attention.
One of the reasons why you might come home
from a loud gathering, maybe a stadium, a sports event,
or a cocktail party for that matter,
and feel just exhausted is because if you were listening
to conversations there or trying to listen
to those conversations while watching the game
and people moving past you and hearing all this noise,
clinking of glasses, et cetera,
it takes attentional effort,
and the brain uses up a lot of energy just at rest,
but it uses up even more energy
when you are paying strong attention to something,
literally caloric energy,
burning up things like glucose, et cetera.
Even if you're ketogenic, it's burning up energy.
So the cocktail party effect has been studied extensively
in the field of neuroscience,
and we now know at a mechanistic level
how one accomplishes this feat of attending to certain sounds
despite the fact that we are being bombarded
with all sorts of other sounds.
So there are a couple of ways that we do this.
First of all, much as with our visual system,
we can expand or contract our visual field of view.
So we can go from panoramic vision,
see the entire scene that we are in by dilating our gaze.
I've talked a lot about this on this podcast and elsewhere.
We can, for instance, keep our head and eyes stationary
or mostly stationary.
You don't have to be rigid about it,
and you can expand your field of view
so you can see the walls and ceiling and floor.
You can see yourself in the environment.
That's panoramic view.
It's what you would accomplish without having to try at all
if you went to a horizon, for instance.
Or we can contract our field of view.
I can bring my focus to a particular location,
what we call a vergence point, directly in front of me.
Now I'm pointing at the camera directly in front of me.
Okay, we can do that.
We can expand and contract our visual field of view.
Well, we can expand and contract our auditory field of view,
so to speak, or our auditory window.
You can try this next time you are in an environment
that's rich with noise, meaning lots of different sounds.
You can just tune out all the noise to a background chatter.
You kind of just, you try not focus
on any one particular sound,
and you get the background kind of chatter of noise.
And you'll find that it's actually very relaxing
in comparison to trying to listen to somebody
at a cocktail party and you're shouting back and forth.
Now, if you're very, very interested in that person
or getting to know them better or what they're telling you
or some combination of those things,
then you'll be very motivated to do it,
but nonetheless, it requires energy and effort and attention.
How do we do this?
Well, it's actually quite simple,
or at least it's simple in essence,
although the underlying mechanisms are complex.
Here, I have to credit the laboratory
of a guy named Mike Wehr, W-E-H-R,
up at the University of Oregon,
who essentially figured out that we are able
to accomplish this extraction of particular sounds.
We can really hear one person or a small number of people
amidst a huge background of chatter
because we pay attention to the onset of words,
but also to the offset of words.
Now, the way to visualize this is if the background noise
is just like a bunch of waves of noise,
it's literally just sound waves coming every frequency,
low frequency, high frequency, glasses clinking together.
If you're at a game, people are shouting,
people are talking on their phone.
There's the crack of the ball if somebody actually manages
to hit the ball, the announcer, et cetera.
But whatever we're paying attention to,
we set up a cone of auditory attention,
a kind of a tunnel of auditory attention
where we are listening, although we don't realize it,
we are listening for the onset and the offset of those words.
Now, this is powerful for a couple of reasons.
First of all, it's a call to arms, so to speak,
to disengage your auditory system
when you don't need to focus your attention
on something particular.
So if you are somebody, you're coming home from work,
you've had a very long day,
and you're trying to make out a particular conversation
on background noise,
you might consider just not having that conversation,
just letting your auditory landscape be very broad,
almost like panoramic vision.
If you're trying to learn
how to extract sound information,
it could be notes of music, it could be scales of music,
it could be words spoken by somebody else.
Maybe somebody is telling you what you need to say
for a particular speech,
or the information that you need to learn
for a particular topic, and they're telling it to you.
Deliberately paying attention both to the onset
and to the offset of those words can be beneficial
because it is exactly the way that the auditory system
likes to bring in information.
So one of the more common phenomenon
that I think we all experience
is you go to a party, or you meet somebody new,
and you say, hi, I would say, hi, I'm Andrew,
and they'd say, hi, I'm Jeff, for instance,
great to meet you.
And then a minute later, I can't remember the guy's name.
Now, is it because I don't care what his name is?
No, somehow the presence
of other auditory information interfered.
It's not that my mind was necessarily someplace else,
it's that the signal to noise, as we say, wasn't high enough.
Somehow the way he said it or the way it landed on my ears,
which is really all that matters, right,
when it comes down to learning,
is such that it just didn't achieve
high enough signal to noise.
The noise was too high or the signal was too low
or some combination of those.
So the next time you ask somebody's name,
remember, listen to the onset of what they say
and the offset.
So it would be paying attention to the j in Jeff,
and it would be paying attention to the th in F, in Jeff,
excuse me, all right?
And chances are you'll be able to remember that name.
Now, I don't know if people who are super learners of names
do this naturally or not.
I don't have access to their brains.
I don't think they're going to give me access
to their brains either,
but it's a very interesting way to take the natural biology
of auditory attention and learning
and apply it to scenarios where you're trying to remember
either people's names or specific information.
Now, I do acknowledge that trying to learn every word
in a sentence by paying attention to its onset and offset
could actually be kind of disruptive
to the learning process.
So this would be more for specific attention.
Like you're asking directions in a city and somebody says,
okay, you say you're lost, and they say, okay,
you're going to go two blocks down,
you're going to turn left,
and then you're going to see a landmark on your right,
and then you're going to go in the third door on your left.
That's a lot of information, at least for me, okay?
So the way you would want to listen to that is
you're going to go down the road.
See, I already forgot.
You're going to go left, and you're just going to program,
and instead of just hearing the word left,
you're going to think the L at the front of left and the T.
You're going to left, okay?
And then, so you're coding in specific words,
and what this does is this kind of hijacks
these naturally occurring attention mechanisms
that the auditory system likes to use.
It's a little bit of data that for auditory encoding,
this kind of thing can be beneficial.
There are a lot of data that attention
for auditory coding is beneficial.
There are a little bit of data showing
that deliberately encoding auditory information this way,
meaning trying to learn auditory information this way,
can be beneficial or can accelerate learning.
And some of these features of what I'm describing here
map onto some of the work of Mike Merzenich and others
that have been designed to try and overcome things
like stutter and to treat various forms
of auditory learning disorders.
But more importantly, and perhaps more powerful,
is the work of Mike Merzenich
that was done with his then graduate student,
Greg Recanzone, that showed that
using the attentional system,
we can actually learn much faster
and we can actually activate neuroplasticity
in the adult brain, something that's very challenging to do,
and that the auditory system is one of the main ways
in which we can access neuroplasticity more broadly.
So I just want to take a couple of minutes
and describe the work of Recanzone and Merzenich
because it's absolutely fantastic and fascinating.
What they did is they had subjects
try to learn auditory information,
except that they told them to pay attention
to particular frequencies.
So now you know what frequencies are,
so essentially high-pitched sounds or low-pitched sounds.
What they found was just passively listening
to a bunch of stuff does not allow the brain to change
and for that stuff to be remembered at all.
That's not a surprise.
We've all experienced the phenomenon of having someone talk
and we see their mouth moving and we're like,
yeah, this is really important, this is really important,
we're listening, we're trying to listen,
and then they walk away and we think,
I didn't get any of that.
And you wonder whether or not it was them,
maybe this is happening to you right now,
you wonder whether or not it was you,
you wonder whether or not you have trouble with learning
or you have attention deficit,
it could be any number of different things.
But what Recanzone and Merzenich discovered
was that if you instruct subjects to listen
for particular cues within speech or within sounds,
that not only can you learn those things more quickly,
but that you can remap these tonotopic maps in the cortex
that I referred to earlier,
you actually get changes in the neural architecture,
the neural circuitry in the brain,
and this can occur not only very rapidly,
but they can occur in the adult brain,
which prior to their work
was not thought to be amenable to change.
It was long thought that neuroplasticity
could only occur in the developing brain,
but the work of Recanzone and Merzenich
in the auditory system actually was some of the first
that really opened up everybody's eyes and ears
to the idea that the brain can change in adulthood.
So here's how this sort of process would work
and how you might apply it.
If you are trying to learn music
or you're trying to learn information
that you're going to then recite,
you can decide to highlight certain words
or certain frequencies of sound
or certain scales or certain keys on the piano
and to only focus on those for certain learning bouts, okay?
So I'll give an example that's sort of real time for me,
meaning it's happening right now.
I know generally what I want to say when I arrive here.
I even know specifically certain things
that I want to make sure get across to you,
but I don't think about every single word
that I'm going to say and the precise order
in which I'm going to say those things.
That would be actually very disruptive
because it wouldn't match my normal patterns of speech
and you'd probably think I was sounding rather robotic
if I were to do that.
So one way that we can remember information is
as we write out, for instance, something that we want to say,
we can highlight particular words.
We can underline those.
If we're listening to somebody
and they are telling us information,
we can decide just to highlight particular words
that they said to us and write those down.
Now, of course, we're listening to all the information,
but the work of Reckinzone and Murzenich
and the work of others, in addition to them,
his former student or former postdoc, I don't know which,
Michael Kilgard, who's now got his own lab down in Texas,
or others, have shown that the queuing of attention
to particular features of speech,
particular components of speech,
the way in which it increases our level of attention overall
allows us to capture more of the information overall.
And so I don't want this to be abstract at all.
What this means is when you're listening,
you don't have to listen to every word.
You're already listening to every word.
All the information's coming in through your ears.
What you're trying to extract is particular things
or themes within the content.
So maybe you decide, if you're listening to me,
that you're only going to listen to the word tools,
or you're only going to listen
to when my voice kind of goes above background.
You get to decide what you decide to listen to or not.
And what you decide to focus on
isn't necessarily as important
as the fact that you're focusing.
So I hope that's clear.
The auditory system does this all the time
with the cocktail party effect.
What I'm talking about is exporting certain elements
of the mechanisms of the cocktail party effect,
paying attention to the onset and offset of words,
or particular notes within music, or particular scales,
or you can make it even broader
and particular motifs of music,
or particular sentences of words, or particular phrases.
And in doing that,
you extract more of the information overall,
even though you're not paying attention
to all the information at once.
Now I'd like to talk about a phenomenon
that you've all experienced before,
which is called Doppler.
So the Doppler effect is the way that we experience sound
when the thing that's making that sound is moving.
The simplest way to explain this
is to translate the sound into the visual world once again.
So if you've ever seen a duck or a goose
sitting in a pond or a lake,
and it's kind of bobbing up and down,
what you'll notice is that the ripples of water
that extend out from that duck or goose
are fairly regularly spaced in all directions.
And that's because that duck or goose is stationary.
It's moving up and down,
but it's not moving forward or backward or to the side.
Now, if that duck or goose were to swim forward
by paddling its little webbed feet under the surface,
you would immediately notice that the ripples of water
that are close to and in front of that duck or goose
would be closer together than the ones that trailed it
that were behind.
And that is essentially what happens with sound as well.
With the Doppler effect,
we experience sounds that are closer to us
at higher frequency, the ripples are closer together,
and sounds that are further away at lower frequency,
especially when they're moving past us.
So if you've ever, for instance,
heard a siren in the distance,
nuh, nuh, nuh, nuh, nuh, nuh, nuh, nuh, nuh, nuh, nuh,
that's essentially my rendition of a siren,
I don't know what ambulance or police or what,
passing you on a street.
That is the Doppler effect.
The Doppler effect is one of the main ways
that we make out the direction that things are arriving from
and their speeds and trajectories.
And we get very good from a very young age
at discerning what direction things are arriving from
and the direction that they are going to pass us in.
And the Doppler effect has probably saved your life
many, many times.
In this way, you just don't realize it
because you'll step off the curb
or you're driving your car and you pull to the side
so that the ambulance or fire truck can go by
because you heard that siren off in the distance.
And then you pull away from the curb
and you get back on the road,
in part because you don't see it any longer,
but also you don't hear any other sirens in the distance.
Now, some animals such as bats are exquisitely good
at navigating their environments according to sound.
Now, we've all heard that bats don't see,
that's actually not true, they actually have vision,
but they just rely more heavily on their auditory system.
And the way that bats navigate in the dark
and the way that bats navigate using sound
is through Doppler.
Now, they don't simply listen to whether or not
things are coming at them or moving away from them
and pay attention to Doppler
like the siren example I gave for you.
What they do is they generate their own sounds.
So a bat, as it flies around, is sending out clicks.
I think that's my best bat sound, or maybe it is.
And they're clicking, they're actually propelling sound out
at a particular frequency that they know.
Now, whether or not they're conscious of it, I don't know.
I've never asked them.
And if I did ask them, I don't think they could answer.
And if they could answer,
they couldn't answer in a language that I could understand.
But the bat is essentially flying around,
sending out sound waves,
pinging its environment with sound waves
of a particular frequency.
And then depending on the frequency of sound waves
that come back, they know if they're getting closer
to an object or further away from it.
So if they send out sounds at a frequency of,
this was much slower than it would actually occur,
but let's say one every half second,
and it's coming back even faster,
then they know they're getting closer
because of the Doppler effect.
And if it comes back more slowly,
they know that there's nothing in front of them.
So the bat is essentially navigating its world
by creating these auras of sound
that bounce back onto them from the various objects,
trees, et cetera, buildings, and people.
It's kind of eerie to think about,
but yes, they see you, they experience you with their sound,
they sense you, and they're using Doppler to accomplish it.
Now I'd like to talk about ringing in the ears.
This is something that I get asked about a lot.
And speaking of signal to noise,
I don't know if I get asked about it a lot
because many people suffer from ringing in their ears
or because the people who suffer from ringing in their ears
suffer so much that they are more prone to ask.
So it could be a sampling bias, I don't know,
but I've been asked enough times,
and some of the experiences of discomfort
that people have expressed
about having this ringing of the ears
really motivate me to go deep into this literature.
So the ringing of the ears that one experiences
is called tinnitus, not tinnitus, but tinnitus.
And tinnitus can vary in intensity
and it can vary according to stress levels.
It can vary across the lifespan or even time of day.
So it's very subject to kind of background effects
and contextual effects.
So I think we all know that we should do our best
to maximize healthy sleep.
We did a number of episodes on that.
Essentially the first four episodes
of the Huberman Lab Podcast were all about sleep
and how to get better sleep.
We all know that we should try and limit our stress,
and we had an episode about stress
and ways to mitigate stress as well.
However, there are people, it seems,
that are suffering from tinnitus
for which stress or lack of sleep
just can't explain the presence of the tinnitus.
Tinnitus can be caused by disruption to these hair cells
that we talked about earlier or damage to the hair cells.
So that's another reason why,
even if you have good hearing now,
that you want to protect that hearing
and really avoid putting yourself
into these kind of two-hit environments,
environments where there's a lot of background noise
and then you add another really loud auditory stimulus.
This also can happen at different times, I should mention.
If you go to a concert or you listen to loud music
with your headphones and then you go to a concert
or you go into a very loud work environment,
the hair cells can still be vulnerable.
And once those hair cells are knocked out,
currently we don't have the technology to put them back,
although many groups,
including some excellent groups at Stanford and elsewhere,
too, of course, are working on ways
to replenish those hair cells and restore hearing.
There are treatments for tinnitus
that involve taking certain substances.
There are medications for tinnitus.
In the non-prescription landscape,
which is typically what we discuss on this podcast
when we discuss taking anything,
there are essentially four compounds
for which there are quality peer-reviewed data
where there does not appear to be any overt commercial bias,
meaning that nothing's reported in the papers
as funding from a particular company.
And those are melatonin, ginkgo bilboa, zinc, and magnesium.
Now, I've talked about melatonin before.
I'm personally not a fan of melatonin as a sleep aid,
but there are four studies.
First one entitled,
the effects of melatonin on tinnitus and sleep.
Second one, treatment of central and sensory neural tinnitus
with orally administered melatonin.
And then the title goes on much longer,
but it's a randomized study.
I'm not going to read out all of these.
Melatonin, can it stop the ringing?
Which is an interesting article, double-blinded study.
And the effects of melatonin on tinnitus.
Each one of these studies has anywhere from 30
to more than 100 subjects, in one case, 102 subjects,
both genders as they list them out.
Typically it's listed as sex, not gender in studies.
So it should say both sexes, but nonetheless.
An age range anywhere from 30 years old
all the way up to 65 plus.
I didn't see any studies of people younger than 30.
All three focused on melatonin,
not surprisingly because of the titles.
Looking at a range of dosages
anywhere from three milligrams per day,
which is sort of typical of many supplements for melatonin,
still much higher than one would manufacture
endogenously through your own pineal gland.
But three milligrams in these studies
for a duration of anywhere from 30 days
to much longer in some cases, six months.
And all four of these studies found modest,
yet still statistically significant effects
of taking melatonin by mouth,
so it's orally administered melatonin,
in reducing the severity of tinnitus.
So that's compelling, at least to me.
It doesn't sound like a cure.
And of course, as always, I'm not a physician.
I'm a scientist, so I don't prescribe anything.
I only profess things.
I report to you the science.
You have to decide if melatonin is right for you,
if you have tinnitus.
And certainly I say that both to protect myself,
but also protect you.
You're responsible for your health and wellbeing.
And I'm not telling anyone to run out
and start taking melatonin for tinnitus,
but it does seem that it can have some effects
in reducing its symptoms.
Ginkgo boa boa is an interesting compound.
It's been prescribed for or recommended for many,
many things, but there are a few studies,
again, double-blinded studies lasting one to six months.
Any one that has an impressive number of subjects,
978 subjects ranging from age 18 all the way up to 65,
so on and so forth,
that show not huge effects of ginkgo,
but as they quote,
"'limited evidence' suggests that if tinnitus
is a side effect of something else,
in particular cognitive decline,"
so age-related tinnitus might be helped by ginkgo boa boa.
I won't go through all the details of the zinc studies,
but it seems that zinc supplementation at higher levels
than are typical of most people's intake,
so 50 milligrams per day,
do appear to be able to reduce subjective symptoms
of tinnitus in most of the people
that took the supplemented zinc.
There aren't a lot of studies on that,
so I could only find one double-blinded study.
It lasted anywhere from one to six months, 41 subjects,
both genders listed out again here, 45 to 64,
and they saw a decrease in the severity
of tinnitus symptoms with 50 milligrams
of elemental zinc supplementation.
And then last but not least is the magnesium study.
Again, only a single study.
It's a phase II study
looking at a fairly limited number of subjects,
so only 19 subjects,
taking 532 milligrams of elemental magnesium.
For those of you that take magnesium,
there's magnesium and elemental magnesium,
and it's always translated on the bottle,
but it was associated with a lessening of symptoms
related to tinnitus.
So for you tinnitus sufferers out there,
you may already be aware of this.
You may already be taking these things
and had no positive effects,
meaning they didn't help, maybe not.
I hope that you'll at least consider these,
talk to your doctor about them.
I do realize that tinnitus is extremely disruptive.
I can't say I empathize
because I don't from a place of experience, that is,
because I don't have tinnitus,
but for those of you that don't, including myself,
you can imagine that hearing sounds
of things that aren't there
and the ringing in one's ears can be very disruptive,
and I think would be very disruptive,
and it explains why people with tinnitus reach out so often
with questions about how to alleviate that,
and I hope this information was useful to you.
I'd like to now talk about balance and our sense of balance,
which is controlled by, believe it or not,
our ears and things in our ears,
as well as by our brain and elements of our spinal cord.
But before I do that, I want to ask you another question,
or I would rather, I'd like to ask you
to ask yourself a question and answer it,
which is how big are your ears?
It turns out that the ears grow our entire life.
In the early stage of our life, they grow more slowly,
and then as we age, they grow more quickly.
You may have noticed if you have family members
who are well into their 70s and 80s,
and if you're fortunate into their 90s
and maybe even hundreds is that the ears
of some of these individuals get very, very big
relative to their previous ear sizes.
It turns out that biological age
can actually be measured according to ear size.
Now, you have to take a few measurements,
but believe it or not, there is a formula
in the scientific literature.
If you know your ear circumference,
so the distance around your ear, ears, plural,
presumably you have two, most people do, in millimeters,
so you're going to take the circumference of your ears
in millimeters, how would you do this, right?
How would you do this?
Maybe you take a string and you put it around your ear
and then you measure the string.
That's probably going to be easier
than marching around your ear or somebody else's ear
with a ruler and measuring in millimeters.
So what's your ear circumference?
On the outside, don't go in on the divot or anything,
you're just going around as if you were going to trace
the closest fitting oval, assuming your ears are oval,
closest fitting oval that matches your ear circumference.
Take that number in millimeters, subtract from it.
Oh, excuse me, I should do this correctly.
Do that for both ears, add them together,
add those numbers together, divide by two,
get the average for your two ears,
get your average ear circumference
from across your two ears,
then take that number in millimeters, subtract 88.1,
and then whatever value that is, multiply it times 1.96,
and that will tell you your biological age.
Now, why in the world would this be accurate?
Well, as we age, there are changes in a number
of different biological pathways.
One of those pathways is the pathways related
to collagen synthesis.
So not only are our ears growing,
but our noses are growing too.
My nose seems to be growing a lot, but then again,
I did sports where I would get my nose broken,
something I don't recommend.
So I always point out, you don't get a nose like mine
doing yoga, but nonetheless, my nose is still growing
and my ears are still growing, and I suspect as I get older,
if I have the good fortune of living into my 80s and 90s,
my ears are going to continue to grow.
A comparison between chronological age
and biological age is something that's
of really deep interest these days,
and the work of David Sinclair
at Harvard Medical School and others,
so-called Horvath clocks that people have developed,
have tapped into how the epigenome and the genome
can give us some insight into our biological age
and how that compares to our chronological age.
Most of us know our chronological age
because we know when we were born,
and we know where we are relative to that now.
But you can start to make a little chart, if you like,
about your rates of ear growth.
Your rates of ear growth actually correlate pretty well
with your rates of biological progression
through this thing that we call life.
So it's not something that we think about too often,
but just like our DNA and our epigenome
and some other markers of metabolic health
and hormone health relate to our age,
so does our collagen synthesis,
and one of the places that shows up the most
is in these two little goodies on the sides of our heads,
which are our ears.
So even though it's a little bit of a bizarre metric,
it makes perfect sense in the biological context.
So let's talk about balance
and how to get better at balancing.
The reason why we're talking about balance
and how to get better at balancing
in the episode about hearing is that all the goodies
that are going to allow you to do that are in your ears.
And they're also in your brain,
but they're mostly in your ears.
So as you recall from the beginning of this episode,
you have two cochlea, cochleas,
that are one on each side of your head,
and that's a little spiral snail-shaped thing
that converts sound waves into electrical signals
that the rest of your brain can understand.
Right next to those,
you have what are called semicircular canals.
The semicircular canals can be best visualized
as thinking about three hula hoops with marbles in them.
So imagine that you have a hula hoop
and it's not filled with marbles all the way around,
it's just got some marbles down there at the base.
Okay, so if you were to move that hula hoop around,
the marbles will move around.
Shoo, shoo, shoo, okay?
You've got three of those,
and each one of those hula hoops has these marbles
that can move around.
One of those hula hoops is positioned vertically
with respect to gravity.
So it's basically parallel to your nose.
It's like this, if you're watching on a video,
but basically it's upright.
Another one of those hula hoops
is basically at a 90-degree angle to your nose.
It's basically parallel to the floor
if you're standing upright now, if you're seated, okay?
And the other one is kind of tilted
about 45 degrees in between those.
Now, why is the system there?
Well, those marbles within each one of those hula hoops
can move around, but they'll only move around
if your head moves in a particular way.
And there are three planes or three ways
that your head can move.
Your head can move up and down, like I'm nodding right now.
So that's called pitch.
It's pitching forward or pitching back, okay?
So it's a nod, up and down.
Or I can shake my head no, side to side.
That's called yaw.
You pilots will be very familiar with this, yaw.
Not yawn, yaw.
And then there's roll, tilting the head from side to side,
the way that a cute puppy might look at you
from side to side, okay?
Where if somebody doesn't really understand
or believe what you're saying,
they might tilt their head, very common phenomenon.
I mean, nobody does that to me,
but they do that to each other.
So pitch, yaw, and roll are the movements of the head
in each of the three major planes of motion, as we say.
And each one of those causes those marbles to move
in one or two of the various hula hoops, okay?
So if I move my head up and down when I nod,
one of those hula hoops, literally right now,
the marbles are moving back and forth.
They aren't actually marbles, by the way.
These are little, kind of like little stones, basically,
little calcium-like deposits.
And when they roll back and forth,
they deflect little hairs, little hair cells
that aren't like the hair cells
that we use for measuring sound waves.
They're not too different, but they are different from them.
Not like the hairs on our heads,
but they're basically rolling past these little hair cells
and causing them to deflect.
And when they deflect downward, the neurons,
because hair cells are neurons,
send information up to the brain.
So if I move my head like this,
there's a physical movement of these little stones
in this hula hoop, as I'm referring to it,
but they deflect these hairs, send those hairs,
which are neurons, those hair cells,
send information off to the brain.
If I move my head from side to side,
different little stones move.
If I roll my head, different stones move.
This is an exquisite system that exists
in all animals that have a jaw.
So any fish that has a jaw has this system.
A puppy has this system.
Any animal that has a jaw has this so-called balance system,
which we call the vestibular system.
One of the more important things to know
about the vestibular, the balance system,
is that it works together with the visual system.
Let's say I hear something off to my left
and I swing my head over to the left to see what it is.
There are two sources of information
about where my head is relative to my body,
and I need to know that.
First of all, when I quickly move my head to the side,
those little stones, as I'm referring to them,
I realize they're not actually stones,
but as I'm referring to them,
they quickly activate those hair cells
in that one semicircular canal
and send a signal off to my brain
that my head just moved to the side like this.
Not that it went like this and pitched back,
or not that it tilted, but it just moved to the side.
But also, visual information slid past my field of view.
I didn't have to think about it,
but just slid past my field of view.
And when those two signals combine,
my eyes then lock to a particular location.
Now, if this is at all complicated,
you can actually uncouple these things.
It's very easy to do.
You can do this right now.
In fact, I'd like you to do this experiment
if you're not already doing something else
that requires your attention,
and certainly don't do this if you're driving.
You're going to sit down
and you're going to move your head to the left very slowly
with your eyes open.
So you're going to move it very, very slowly.
The whole thing should take about five, six,
maybe even 10 seconds to complete.
Okay, I just did it.
Now I'm going to do it very quickly.
I'd like you to do it very quickly as well.
Now do it slowly again.
Okay, what you probably noticed
is that it's very uncomfortable to do it slowly,
but you can do it very quickly
without much discomfort at all.
You just move your head to the side.
The reason is when you move your head very slowly,
those little stones at the base of that hula hoop,
they don't get enough momentum to move.
So you're actually not generating this signal to the brain
that your head is moving.
And what you'll notice is that your eyes have to go boom,
boom, boom, jumping over step by step.
Whereas if you move your head really quickly,
the signal gets off to your brain and your eyes just go,
boom, right to the location you want to look at.
So moving your body slowly is actually very disruptive
to the vestibular system.
And it's very disruptive to your visual system.
Now, if you've ever had the misfortune of being on a boat
and you're going through big oscillations on the boat,
for those of you folks that get seasick,
this can actually make certain people seasick
just to hear about it.
That was big oscillations going up and down
and up and down.
Those are very disruptive.
We'll talk about nausea in a minute
and how to offset that kind of nausea.
I get pretty seasick,
but there are ways that you can deal with this.
But this is incredible because what it means
is it's a purely physical system of these little stones
rolling around in there
and directing where your eyes should go, okay?
So you can do this also just by looking up.
So let's just say you're sitting in a chair.
You're going to look up towards the ceiling
and your eyes will just go there.
You're doing this eyes open and you look down.
Now try doing it really, really slowly.
Some people even get motion sick doing this,
which if you do, then just stop, okay?
So you can do this also to the side,
although it works best if you're moving your head
from side to side or nodding up and down.
So what we're doing here
is we're uncoupling these two mechanisms.
We're pulling them apart, the visual part
and the vestibular part, just to illustrate to you
that normally these mechanisms in your inner ear
tell your eyes where to go,
but as well, your eyes tell your balance system,
your vestibular system, how to function.
So I'd like you to do a different experiment.
I'm not going to do it right now, but basically stand up.
If you get the opportunity,
you can do this safely wherever you are.
You're going to stand up
and you're going to look forward about 10, 12 feet.
Pick a point on a wall or you can, anywhere that you like.
If you're out in public, just do it anyway.
Just tell them you're listening to Huberman Lab Podcast
and someone's telling you to do it.
Anyway, if you don't want to do it, don't do it,
but basically do it.
Stand on one leg and lift up the other leg.
You can bend your knee if you like,
and just look off into the distance about 10, 12 feet.
If you can do that, if you can stand on one leg,
now close your eyes.
Chances are you're going to suddenly feel
what scientists call postural sway.
You're going to start swaying around a lot.
It is very hard to balance with your eyes closed.
You might think, well, and if you think about that,
it's like, why is that?
That's crazy.
Why would it be that it's hard to balance
with your eyes closed?
Well, information about the visual world
also feeds back onto this vestibular system.
So the vestibular system informs your vision
and tells you where to move your eyes,
and your eyes and their positioning
tell your balance system, your vestibular system,
how it should function.
So there's a really cool way
that you can learn to optimize balance.
You're not going to try and do this
by learning to balance with your eyes closed.
What you can do is you can raise one leg,
and you can look at a short distance,
maybe off to just the distance that your thumb would be
if you were to reach your arm out in front of you,
although you don't necessarily have to put your thumb
in front of you.
So maybe just about two feet in front of you.
Then while still balancing,
you're going to step your vision out a further distance,
and then a further distance,
and as far as you can possibly see
in the environment that you're in.
And then you're going to march it back to you.
Now, what the literature shows
is that this kind of balance training
where you incorporate the visual system
and extending out and then marching back in,
the point at which you direct your visual focus,
sends robust information about the relationship
between your visual world and your balance system.
And of course, the balance system includes
not just these hula hoops, these semicircular canals,
but they communicate with the cerebellum,
the so-called mini brain actually means mini brain
in the back of your brain,
combines that with visual information
and your map of the body surface.
That pattern of training is very beneficial
for enhancing your ability to balance
because the ability to balance is in part
the activation of particular postural muscles,
but just as much, perhaps even more so,
it's about being able to adjust those postural muscles,
excuse me, it's about the ability
to adjust those postural muscles
as you experience changes in your visual world.
And one of the most robust ways that you can engage changes
in your visual world is through your own movement.
And so most people are not trying to balance in place.
They're not just trying to stand there
like a statue on one leg.
Most of what we think about when we think about balance
is for sake of sport or dynamic balance,
of being able to break ourselves
and when we're lunging in one particular direction
to stop ourselves, that is,
and then to move in another direction
or for skateboarding or surfing or cycling
or any number of different things, gymnastics.
So the visual system is the primary input
by which you develop balance,
but you can't do it just with the visual system.
So what I'm recommending is if you're interested
in cultivating a sense of balance,
understand the relationship between
these semicircular canals.
Understand that they are both driving eye movements
and they are driven by eye movements.
It's a reciprocal relationship.
And then even just two or three minutes a day
or every once in a while, even three times a week,
maybe five minutes, maybe 10 minutes, you pick.
But if you want to enhance balance,
you have to combine changes in your visual environment
with a static posture, standing on one leg
and shifting your visual environment
or static visual view, looking at one thing
and changing your body posture, okay?
So those two things we now know
from the scientific literature combine
in order to give an enhanced sense of balance.
And there's a really nice paper that was published in 2015
called Effects of Balance Training on Balance Performance.
This was in Healthy Adults.
It's a systematic review and a meta-analysis.
A meta-analysis is when you combine a lot of literature
from a lot of different papers
and extract the really robust
and the less robust statistical effects.
So it's a really nice paper as well.
There are some papers out there, for instance,
a comparison of static balance
and the role of vision in the elite athletes.
This is essentially the paper that I've extracted
most of the information that I just gave you from.
And that paper, and there are some others as well,
but basically I distilled them down
into their core components.
The core components are move your vision around
while staying static still,
but in a balanced position like standing on one leg.
Could be something more complicated
if you're somebody who can do more complicated movements.
Unilateral movements seem to be important.
So standing on one leg as opposed to both, right?
Or trying to generate some tilt
is another way to go about it or imbalance,
meaning one limb asymmetrically being activated
compared to the other limb.
And then the other way to encourage or to cultivate
and build up this vestibular system
and your sense of balance
actually involves movement itself, acceleration.
So that's what we're going to talk about now.
So up until now, I've been talking about balance
only in the static sense,
like standing on one leg, for instance,
but that's a very artificial situation.
Even though you can train balance that way,
most people who want to enhance their sense of balance
for sport or dance or some other endeavor
want to engage balance in a dynamic way,
meaning moving through lots of different planes of movement,
maybe even sometimes while squatting down low
or jumping and landing
or making trajectories that are different angles.
For that, we need to consider that the vestibular system
also cares about acceleration.
So it cares about head position,
it cares about eye position
and where the eyes are and where you're looking,
but it also cares about what direction you're moving
and how fast.
And one of the best things that you can do
to enhance your sense of balance
is to start to bring together your visual system,
the semicircular canals of the inner ear,
and what we call linear acceleration.
So if I move forward in space rigidly upright,
it's a vastly different situation
than if I'm leaning to the side.
One of the best ways to cultivate a better sense of balance,
literally, within the sense organs and the neurons
and the biology of the brain
is to get into modes where we are accelerating forward,
typically it's forward,
while also tilted with respect to gravity.
Now, this would be the carve on a skateboard
or on a surfboard or a snowboard.
This would be the taking a corner on a bike
while being able to lean safely, of course,
lean into the turn so that your head is actually tilted
with respect to the earth.
So anytime that we are rigidly upright,
we aren't really exercising the vestibular system and balance.
This is why, you know, you see people in the gym on these,
what are those Bonshi balls, Bonshi balls?
Bonshi ball's the one that the guys roll in the park, right?
Bonshi balls where they're balancing back and forth.
That will work the small stabilizing muscles.
But what I'm talking about is getting into modes
where you actually tilt the body and the head
with respect to earth.
What I mean is with respect to earth's gravitational pull.
Now, the cerebellum is a very interesting structure
because not only is it involved in balance,
but it's also involved in skill learning
and in generating timing of movements.
It's a fascinating structure deserving of an entire episode
or several episodes all on its own.
But some of the outputs of the cerebellum,
meaning the neurons in the cell cerebellum get inputs,
but they also send information out.
The outputs of the cerebellum are strongly linked
to areas of the brain that release neuromodulators
that make us feel really good,
in particular, serotonin and dopamine.
And this is an early emerging subfield within neuroscience,
but a lot of what are called the non-motor outputs
of the cerebellum have a profound influence,
not just on our ability to learn how to balance better,
but also how we feel overall.
So for you exercisers out there,
I do hope people are getting
regular healthy amounts of exercise.
We've talked about what that means in previous episodes.
So at least 150 minutes a week of endurance work,
some strength training, a minimum of five sets per body part
to maintain musculature.
Even if you don't want to grow muscles,
you want to do that in order to maintain
healthy strength and bones, et cetera.
If you're doing that,
but you're only doing things like curls in the gym,
squats in the gym, riding the Peloton,
or even if you're outside running
and you're getting forward acceleration,
but you're never actually getting tilted, right?
You're never actually getting tilted
with respect to Earth's gravitational pull.
You're not really exercising
and getting the most out of your nervous system.
Activation of the cerebellum in this way of being tilted
or the head being tilted and the body being tilted
while in acceleration, typically forward acceleration,
but sometimes side to side,
has a profound and positive effect
on our sense of mood and wellbeing.
And as I talked about in a previous episode,
it can also enhance our ability to learn information
in the period after generating those tilts
and the acceleration.
And that's because the cerebellum has these outputs
to these areas of the brain
that release these neuromodulators
like serotonin and dopamine,
and they make us feel really good.
I think this is one of the reasons why growing up,
I had some friends, some of whom might've been
the world heavyweight champions of laziness
for essentially everything,
except they would wake up at 4.30 in the morning
to go surf.
They would drive, they would get up so early to go surf.
It's not just surfers, and some surfers, by the way,
I should point out are not lazy humans.
They do a lot of other things,
but I knew people that couldn't be motivated to do anything,
but they were highly driven to get into these experiences
of forward acceleration while tilted
with respect to gravity.
Likewise with snowboarding or skiing or cycling,
those modes of exercise seem to have an outsized effect
both on our wellbeing and our ability
to translate the vestibular balance
that we achieve in those endeavors
to our ability to balance while doing other things.
So, and I don't mean psychological balance necessarily,
I mean physical balance.
So for those of you that don't think of yourselves
as very coordinated or with very good balance,
getting into these modes of acceleration,
forward movement or lateral movement while getting tilted,
even if you have to do it slowly, could be beneficial,
I do believe, and the scientific literature points
to the fact that it will be beneficial
for cultivating better sense of physical balance.
It can really build up the circuits
of this vestibular system.
And then of course the feel-good components
of acceleration while tilted
or while getting the head into different orientations
relative to gravity.
Well, that's the explanation for roller coasters.
Some people hate roller coasters,
they make them feel nauseous.
Many people love roller coasters.
And one of the reasons they love roller coasters
is because of the way that when you get the body,
even if you're not generating the movement,
you get the body into forward acceleration
and you're going upside down and tilted to the side
as the tracks go from side to side and tilt, et cetera,
you're getting activation of these deeper brain nuclei
that trigger the release of neuromodulators
that just make us feel really, really good.
In fact, some people get a long arc, a long duration
kind of buzz from having gone through those experiences.
Some people who hate roller coasters
are probably getting nauseous just hearing about that.
So I encourage people to get into modes of acceleration
while tilted every once in a while,
provided you can do it safely.
It's an immensely powerful way to build up your skills
in the realm of balance.
And it's also, for most people, very, very pleasing.
It feels really good because of the chemical relationship
between forward acceleration and head tilt and body tilt.
Now, speaking of feeling nauseous, some people suffer
from vertigo, some people feel dizzy,
some people get lightheaded.
An important question to ask yourself always
if you're feeling quote unquote dizzy or lightheaded is,
are you dizzy or are you lightheaded?
Now, we're not going to diagnose anything here
because there's just no way we can do that.
This is essentially me shouting into a tunnel
so we don't know what's going on
with each and every one of you.
But if ever you feel that your world is spinning,
but that you can focus on your thumb, for instance,
but the rest of the world is spinning
and your thumb is stationary, that's called being dizzy.
Now, if you feel like you're falling
or that you feel like you need to get down onto the ground
because you feel lightheaded, that's being lightheaded.
And oftentimes with language, we don't distinguish
between being dizzy and being lightheaded.
Now, there are a lot of ways that dizziness
and lightheadedness can occur.
And I don't even want to begin to guess
at the number of different things and ways
that it could happen for those of you that suffer from it
because it could be any number of them.
But oftentimes if people are lightheaded,
yes, it could be low blood sugar.
It could also be that you're dehydrated.
It could also be that you are low in electrolytes.
We talked about this in a previous episode,
but we will talk about it more in a future episode.
Many people have too little sodium in their system, salt,
and that's why they feel lightheaded.
I have family members who for years
thought they had disrupted blood sugar.
They would get shaky, jittery, lightheaded,
feel like they were nauseous, et cetera.
And simply the addition of a little sea salt
to their water remedied the problem entirely.
I don't think it's going to remedy every issue
of lightheadedness out there by any stretch,
but just the addition of salt in this particular case
helped the person and they are not alone.
Many people would think that they have low blood sugar
actually are lightheaded because of low electrolytes
and because of the way that salt carries water
into the system and creates changes in blood volume, et cetera
low sodium can often be a source of lightheadedness
as can low blood sugar and of course other things as well.
Now for dizziness or seasickness,
we were all taught that you need to pick a point
on the horizon and focus on it.
But actually that's not correct.
It is true that if you are down in the cabin of a boat
or you're on the lower deck
and all you can see are things up close to you
that getting sloshed around like so
or the boat going up and down like so,
I think I'm getting a little seasick
even as I do this and I describe it.
Focusing on things close to you can be problematic.
And in that case, the advice to go up on deck
and get fresh air and to look off into the horizon,
that part is correct.
But focusing your eyes on a particular location
on the horizon is effectively like trying
to move very slowly as I had you do before
where you're trying to move your head very slowly
while fixating on one location.
Your eyes and your balance system
were designed to move together.
So really what you want to do is allow your visual system
to track with your vestibular system.
This is why sitting in the back of an Uber or a taxi
and being on your phone
can make you suddenly feel very nauseous.
Sometimes the cabs, particularly in New York City,
they have a lot of occluders.
They have a lot of stuff blocking your field of view.
There's usually a little portal out
that where you can see out to the front windshield,
but there's all this stuff now.
Television's in the back seat
and you're watching that television and the cab is moving.
You're in linear acceleration
and sometimes you're taking corners, you're braking.
So then your vestibular system has to adjust to that.
If you're looking at your phone or a book,
or even if you're talking to somebody,
actually, I'm starting to feel a little nauseous.
I promise I'm not going to finish this episode
by vomiting at the end, at least not here.
But what can happen is that you're uncoupling
the visual information from your motion,
from your vestibular information.
You want those to be coupled.
This is why a lot of people have to drive.
They can't be in the passenger seat
because when you drive,
you also get what's called proprioceptive feedback.
Your body is sending signals also to the vestibular system
about where you are in space.
When you're the passenger,
you're just getting jolted around as the person is driving.
And if you're looking at your phone, it's even worse.
And if you're looking at the occluder
between you and the two front seats, that's even worse.
So this is why staring out the front windshield is great,
but you don't want to fixate, okay?
So hopefully I spared a few people
and hopefully a few cab drivers
of having people get sick in their cars or Ubers.
Let your visual system
and your vestibular system work together.
If appropriate, get into linear acceleration
and you'll improve your sense of balance.
Once again, we've covered a tremendous amount
of information.
Now you know how you hear,
how you make sense of the sounds in your environment,
how those come into your ears
and how your brain processes them.
In addition, we talked about things
like low-level white noise and even binaural beats,
which can be used to enhance certain brain states,
certain rhythms within the brain and even dopamine release
in ways that allow you to learn better.
And we talked about the balance system
and this incredible relationship
between your vestibular apparatus,
meaning the portions of your inner ear
that are responsible for balance
and your visual system and gravity.
And you can use those to enhance your learning as well,
as well as just to enhance your sense of balance.
If you're learning from this podcast,
please subscribe on YouTube.
That really helps us.
In addition, please leave us any comments or feedback
or suggestions for future episode content on YouTube
in the comment section.
If you haven't already subscribed on Apple and Spotify,
please do that as well.
And on Apple, you have the opportunity
to leave us up to a five-star review.
At Apple, you can also leave us comments and feedback.
During this episode, I mentioned some supplements.
We partnered with Thorne
because Thorne has the very highest levels of stringency
with respect to the quality of their ingredients
and accuracy about the amounts of those ingredients
contained within their products.
If you'd like to see the products that I take from Thorne,
you can go to thorne.com slash the letter U slash Huberman.
So that's thorne.com slash U slash Huberman
to see all the supplements that I take.
And if you do that,
you can get 20% off any of those supplements
or 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes.
For those of you that might want to support us
in other ways, we have a Patreon account.
It's patreon.com slash Andrew Huberman.
And there you can support our podcast
at any level that you like.
In addition, if you'd like to support the podcast,
please check out our sponsors mentioned
at the beginning of the episode.
That is absolutely the best way to support us.
Last but not least,
I'd like to thank you for your time and attention
and desire and willingness to learn
about vision and balance.
And of course, thank you for your interest in science.
And as always, thanks for watching.